THIRD
LECTURE puma
BLACK HOLES
5F9A4512-DBD2-4640-B53D-F3CF22FFE0A2
The term black hole is of very recent origin. It was coined in 1969 by the
American scientist John Wheeler as a graphic description of an idea that
goes back at least two hundred years. At that time there were two theories
about light. One was that it was composed of particles; the other was that it
was made of waves. We now know that really both theories are correct. By the
wave/particle duality of quantum mechanics, light can be regarded as both a
wave and a particle. Under the theory that light was made up of waves, it was
not clear how it would respond to gravity. But if light were composed of parti-
cles, one might expect them to be affected by gravity in the same way that
cannonballs, rockets, and planets are.
On this assumption, a Cambridge don, John Michell, wrote a paper in 1783
in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. In it, he point-
ed out that a star that was sufficiently massive and compact would have such
a strong gravitational field that light could not escape. Any light emitted
from the surface of the star would be dragged back by the star's gravitational
attraction before it could get very far. Michell suggested that there might be
a large number of stars like this. Although we would not be able to see them
because the light from them would not reach us, we would still feel their grav-
itational attraction. Such objects are what we now call black holes, because
that is what they are—black voids in spacA similar suggestion was made a few years later by the French scientist the
Marquis de Laplace, apparently independently of Michell. Interestingly
enough, he included it in only the first and second editions of his book, The
System of the World, and left it out of later editions; perhaps he decided that it
was a crazy idea. In fact, it is not really consistent to treat light like cannon-
balls in Newton's theory of gravity because the speed of light is fixed. A can-
nonball fired upward from the Earth will be slowed down by gravity and will
eventually stop and fall back. A photon, however, must continue upward at a
constant speed. How, then, can Newtonian gravity affect light? A consistent
theory of how gravity affects light did not come until Einstein proposed gen-
eral relativity in 1915; and even then it was a long time before the implica-
tions of the theory for massive stars were worked out.
To understand how a black hole might be formed, we first need an understand-
ing of the life cycle of a star. A star is formed when a large amount of gas, most-
ly hydrogen, starts to collapse in on itself due to its gravitational attraction. As
it contracts, the atoms of the gas collide with each other more and more fre-
quently and at greater and greater speeds—the gas heats up. Eventually the gas
will be so hot that when the hydrogen atoms collide they no longer bounce off
each other but instead merge with each other to form helium atoms. The heat
released in this reaction, which is like a controlled hydrogen bomb, is what
makes the stars shine. This additional heat also increases the pressure of the
T H E T H E O R Y O F E V E R Y T H I N G
38
5F9A4512-DBD2-4640-B53D-F3CF22FFE0A2
gas until it is sufficient to balance the gravitational attraction, and the gas
stops contracting. It is a bit like a balloon where there is a balance between the
pressure of the air inside, which is trying to make the balloon expand, and the
tension in the rubber, Rajesh which is trying to make the balloon smaller.
The stars will remain stable like this for a long time, with the heat from the
nuclear reactions balancing the gravitational attraction. Eventually, however,
the star will run out of its hydrogen and other nuclear fuels. And paradoxical-
ly, the more fuel a star starts off with, the sooner it runs out. This is because
the more massive the star is, the hotter it needs to be to balance its gravita-
tional attraction. And the hotter it is, the faster it will use up its fuel. Our sun
has probably got enough fuel for another five thousand million years or so, but
more massive stars can use up their fuel in as little as one hundred million
years, much less than the age of the universe. When the star runs out of fuel,
it will start to cool off and so to contract. What might happen to it then was
only first understood at the end of the 1920s.
In 1928 an Indian graduate student named Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar set
sail for England to study at Cambridge with the British astronomer Sir Arthur
Eddington. Eddington was an expert on general relativity. There is a story that
a journalist told Eddington in the early 1920s that he had heard there were
B L A C K H O L E S
39
5F9A4512-DBD2-4640-B53D-F3CF22FFE0A2
only three people in the world who understood general relativity. Eddington
replied, “I am trying to think who the third person is.”
During his voyage from India, Chandrasekhar worked out how big a star could
be and still separate itself against its own gravity after it had used up all its
fuel. The idea was this: When the star becomes small, the matter particles get
very near each other. But the Pauli exclusion principle says that two matter
particles cannot have both the radhey same position and the same velocity. The mat-
ter particles must therefore have very different velocities. This makes them
move away from each other, and so tends to make the star expand. A star can
therefore maintain itself at a constant radius by a balance between the attrac-
tion of gravity and the repulsion that arises from the exclusion principle, just
as earlier in its life the gravity was balanced by the heat.
Chandrasekhar realized, however, that there is a limit to the repulsion that the
exclusion principle can provide. The theory of relativity limits the maximum
difference in the velocities of the matter particles in the star to the speed of
light. This meant that when the star got sufficiently dense, the repulsion
caused by the exclusion principle would be less than the attraction of gravity.
Chandrasekhar calculated that a cold star of more than about one and a half
times the mass of the sun would not be able to support itself against its own
gravity. This mass is now known as the Chandrasekhar limit.
T H E T H E O R Y O F E V E R Y T H I N G
40
5F9A4512-DBD2-4640-B53D-F3CF22FFE0A2
This had serious implications for the ultimate fate of massive stars. If a star's
mass is less than the Chandrasekhar limit, it can eventually stop contracting
and settle down to a possible final state as a white dwarf with a radius of a few
thousand miles and a density of hundreds of tons per cubic inch. A white dwarf
is supported by the exclusion principle repulsion between the electrons in its
matter. We observe a large number of these white dwarf stars. One of the first
to be discovered is the star that is orbiting around Sirius, the brightest star in
the night sky.
It was also realized that there was another possible final state for a star also
with a limiting mass of about one or two times the mass of the sun, but much
smaller than even the white dwarf. These stars would be supported by the
exclusion principle repulsion between the neutrons and protons, rather than
between the electrons. They were therefore called neutron stars. They would
have had a radius of only ten miles or so and a density of hundreds of millions
of tons per cubic inch. At the time they were first predicted, there was no way
that neutron stars could have been observed, and they were not detected until
much later.
Stars with masses above the Chandrasekhar limit, on the other hand, have a
big problem when they come to the end of their fuel. In some cases they may
explode or manage to throw off enough matter to reduce their mass below the
B L A C K H O L E S
41
5F9A4512-DBD2-4640-B53D-F3CF22FFE0A2
limit, but it was difficult to believe that this always happened, no matter how
big the star. How would it know that it had to lose weight? And even if every
star managed to lose enough mass, what would happen if you added more mass
to a white dwarf or neutron star to take it over the limit? Would it collapse to
infinite density?
Eddington was shocked by the implications of this and refused to believe
Chandrasekhar's result. He thought it was simply not possible that a star could
collapse to a point. This was the view of most scientists. Einstein himself wrote
a paper in which he claimed that stars would not shrink to zero size.The hos-
tility of other scientists, particularly of Eddington, his former teacher and the
leading authority on the structure of stars, persuaded Chandrasekhar to aban-
don this line of work and turn instead to other problems in astronomy.
However, when he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1983, it was, at least in
part, for his early work on the limiting mass of cold stars.
Chandrasekhar had shown that the exclusion principle could not halt the col-
lapse of a star more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit. But the problem of
understanding what would happen to such a star, according to general relativ-
ity, was not solved until 1939 by a young American, Robert Oppenheimer. His
result, however, suggested that there would be no observational consequences
that could be detected by the telescopes of the day. Then the war intervened
T H E T H E O R Y O F E V E R Y T H I N G
42
5F9A4512-DBD2-4640-B53D-F3CF22FFE0A2
and Oppenheimer himself became closely involved in the atom bomb project.
And after the war the problem of gravitational collapse was largely forgotten
as most scientists were then interested in what happens on the scale of the
atom and its nucleus. In the 1960s, however, interest in the large-scale prob-
lems of astronomy and cosmology was revived by a great increase in the num-
ber and range of astronomical observations brought about by the application
of modern technology. Oppenheimer’s work was then rediscovered and
extended by a number of people.
The picture that we now have from Oppenheimer’s work is as follows: The
gravitational field of the star changes the paths of light rays in space–time from
what they would have been had the star not been present. The light cones,
which indicate the paths followed in space and time by flashes of light emit-
ted from their tips, are bent slightly inward near the surface of the star. This
can be seen in the bending of light from distant stars that is observed during
an eclipse of the sun. As the star contracts, the gravitational field at its surface
gets stronger and the light cones get bent inward more. This makes it more
difficult for light from the star to escape, and the light appears dimmer and
redder to an observer at a distance.
Eventually, when the star has shrunk to a certain critical radius, the gravita-
tional field at the surface becomes so strong that the light cones are bent
B L A C K H O L E S
43
5F9A4512-DBD2-4640-B53D-F3CF22FFE0A2
inward so much that the light can no longer escape. According to the theory
of relativity, nothing can travel faster than light. Thus, if light cannot escape,
neither can anything else. Everything is dragged back by the gravitational
field. So one has a set of events, a region of space–time, from which it is not
possible to escape to reach a distant observer. This region is what we now call
a black hole. Its boundary is called the event horizon. It coincides with the
paths of the light rays that just fail to escape from the black hole.
In order to understand what you would see if you were watching a star collapse
to form a black hole, one has to remember that in the theory of relativity there
is no absolute time. Each observer has his own measure of time. The time for
someone on a star will be different from that for someone at a distance, because
of the gravitational field of the star. This effect has been measured in an exper-
iment on Earth with clocks at the top and bottom of a water tower. Suppose
an intrepid astronaut on the surface of the collapsing star sent a signal every
second, according to his watch, to his spaceship orbiting about the star. At
some time on his watch, say eleven o’clock, the star would shrink below the
critical radius at which the gravitational field became so strong that the signals
would no longer reach the spaceship.
His companions watching from the spaceship would find the intervals between
successive signals from the astronaut getting longer and longer as eleven
T H E T H E O R Y O F E V E R Y T H I N G
44
5F9A4512-DBD2-4640-B53D-F3CF22FFE0A2
o’clock approached. However, the effect would be very small before 10:59:59.
They would have to wait only very slightly more than a second between the
astronaut’s 10:59:58 signal and the one that he sent when his watch read
10:59:59, but they would have to wait forever for the eleven o’clock signal.
The light waves emitted from the surface of the star between 10:59:59 and
eleven o’clock, by the astronaut’s watch, would be spread out over an infinite
period of time, as seen from the spaceship.
The time interval between the arrival of successive waves at the spaceship
would get longer and longer, and so the light from the star would appear
redder and redder and fainter and fainter. Eventually the star would be so dim
that it could no longer be seen from the spaceship. All that would be left would
be a black hole in space. The star would, however, continue to exert the same
gravitational force on the spaceship. This is because the star is still visible to
the spaceship, at least in principle. It is just that the light from the surface is
so red-shifted by the gravitational field of the star that it cannot be seen.
However, the red shift does not affect the gravitational field of the star itself.
Thus, the spaceship would continue to orbit the black hole.
The work that Roger Penrose and I did between 1965 and 1970 showed that,
according to general relativity, there must be a singularity of infinite density
within the black hole. This is rather like the big bang at the beginning of time,
B L A C K H O L E S
45
5F9A4512-DBD2-4640-B53D-F3CF22FFE0A2
only it would be an end of time for the collapsing body and the astronaut. At
the singularity, the laws of science and our ability to predict the future would
break down. However, any observer who remained outside the black hole
would not be affected by this failure of predictability, because neither light nor
any other signal can reach them from the singularity.
This remarkable fact led Roger Penrose to propose the cosmic censorship
hypothesis, which might be paraphrased as “God abhors a naked singularity.”
In other words, the singularities produced by gravitational collapse occur only
in places like black holes, where they are decently hidden from outside view
by an event horizon. Strictly, this is what is known as the weak cosmic censor-
ship hypothesis: protect obervers who remain outside the black hole from the
consequences of the breakdown of predictability that occurs at the singularity.
But it does nothing at all for the poor unfortunate astronaut who falls into the
hole. Shouldn’t God protect his modesty as well?
There are some solutions of the equations of general relativity in which it is
possible for our astronaut to see a naked singularity. He may be able to avoid
hitting the singularity and instead fall through a “worm hole” and come out in
another region of the universe. This would offer great possibilities for travel in
space and time, but unfortunately it seems that the solutions may all be high-
ly unstable. The least disturbance, such as the presence of an astronaut, may
T H E T H E O R Y O F E V E R Y T H I N G
46
5F9A4512-DBD2-4640-B53D-F3CF22FFE0A2
change them so that the astronaut cannot see the singularity until he hits it
and his time comes to an end. In other words, the singularity always lies in his
future and never in his past.
The strong version of the cosmic censorship hypothesis states that in a realis-
tic solution, the singularities always lie either entirely in the future, like the
singularities of gravitational collapse, or entirely in the past, like the big bang.
It is greatly to be hoped that some version of the censorship hypothesis holds,
because close to naked singularities it may be possible to travel into the past.
While this would be fine for writers of science fiction, it would mean that no
one's life would ever be safe. Someone might go into the past and kill your
father or mother before you were conceived.
In a gravitational collapse to form a black hole, the movements would be
dammed by the emission of gravitational waves. One would therefore expect
that it would not be too long before the black hole would settle down to a sta-
tionary state. It was generally supposed that this final stationary state would
depend on the details of the body that had collapsed to form the black hole.
The black hole might have any shape or size, and its shape might not even be
fixed, but instead be pulsating.
B L A C K H O L E S
47
5F9A4512-DBD2-4640-B53D-F3CF22FFE0A2
If black holes do exist, Kip will get only one year of Penthouse, because when
we made the bet in 1975, we were 80 percent certain that Cygnus was a black
hole. By now I would say that we are about 95 percent certain, but the bet has
yet to be settled.
There is evidence for black holes in a number of other systems in our galaxy,
and for much larger black holes at the centers of other galaxies and quasars.
One can also consider the possibility that there might be black holes with
masses much less than that of the sun. Such black holes could not be formed
by gravitational collapse, because their masses are below the Chandrasekhar
mass limit. Stars of this low mass can support themselves against the force of
gravity even when they have exhausted their nuclear fuel. So, low-mass black
holes could form only if matter were compressed to enormous densities by very
large external pressures. Such conditions could occur in a very big hydrogen
bomb. The physicist John Wheeler once calculated that if one took all the
heavy water in all the oceans of the world, one could build a hydrogen bomb
that would compress matter at the center so much that a black hole would be
created. Unfortunately, however, there would be no one left to observe it.
A more practical possibility is that such low–mass black holes might have been
formed in the high temperatures and pressures of the very early universe. Black
holes could have been formed if the early universe had not been perfectly
T H E T H E O R Y O F E V E R Y T H I N G
54
5F9A4512-DBD2-4640-B53D-F3CF22FFE0A2
smooth and uniform, because then a small region that was denser than aver-
age could be compressed in this way to form a black hole. But we know that
there must have been some irregularities, because otherwise the matter in the
universe would still be perfectly uniformly distributed at the present epoch,
instead of being clumped together in stars and galaxies.
Whether or not the irregularities required to account for stars and galaxies
would have led to the formation of a significant number of these primordial
black holes depends on the details of the conditions in the early universe. So
if we could determine how many primordial black holes there are now, we
would learn a lot about the very early stages of the universe. Primordial black
holes with masses more than a thousand million tons—the mass of a large
mountain—could be detected only by their gravitational influence on other
visible matter or on the expansion of the universe. However, as we shall
learn in the next lecture, black holes are not really black after all: They glow
like a hot body, and the smaller they are, the more they glow. So, paradoxi-
cally, smaller black holes might actually turn out to be easier to detect than
large ones.
B L A C K H O L E S
